# A Model Generalization Study in Localizing Indoor Cows with COw LOcalization (COLO) dataset

This study evaluates the generalization capabilities of computer vision (CV) models for detecting cow locations in indoor free-stall barn setting, quantifying the resources needed for a CV model to generalize well across different farms in which camera angles and lighting condition vary. Considering precision livestock farming (PLF) increasingly relies on advanced object localization techniques to monitor livestock health and optimize resource management, a quantitative understanding of how to deploy a CV model with minimal resources and compromise least on performance is essential. Preparing large image dataset and deploying CV model with large size of parameters are two of the most resource-intensive tasks in CV model development. Hence, this study examine the generalization capability in three hypotheses: (1)  Model generalization is equally influenced by changes in lighting conditions and camera angles; (2) Higher model complexity guarantees better generalization performance; (3) Fine-tuning with custom initial weights trained on relevant tasks enhances final performance than training from pre-trained weights. The newly released COws LOcalization (COLO) dataset is used to evaluate the hypotheses. The COLO dataset contains 1254 images and 11,818 cow instances. The dataset is collected from 5 different imaging settings with different camera angles and lighting conditions to investigate the impact of these imaging variable. The first hypothesis was examined by evaluating on images taken from different camera angles from the images that are used to train the model. The second hypothesis was examined by comparing the performance of five different parameter sizes of the same architectures (e.g., YOLO11n with 2.6 million versus YOLO11x with 56.9 million parameters) on the same dataset. The third hypothesis was examine on a CV model that was first trained on images taken in a similar barn setting and then fine-tuned on another subset of the same barn setting. As a result, the change of lighting condision has neglegible impact on the model generalization, while shifting camara from top view to side view significantly drop (p-value < 0.001) on the model performance. The study also discover that higher model complexity does not always yield a better performance, with the optimal model complexity depending on the specific task and dataset. The study also show that fine-tuning with custom initial weights only favor small simple model, with no significant benefit for larger models by training the model from 
scratch. At the era where articial intelligience is increasingly used and a recent rising concern on the environmental impact of AI, this study provides practical guidelines for PLF researchers to deploy CV models effectively with optimized resources, address generalization challenges, and leverage the present public COLO dataset to drive further research.